introdocs + demo + instructions on writing good rules (#103)
JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl: docs/src/index.md

### Introduction

ChainRules is all about providing a rich set of rules for differentiation.
When a person learns introductory calculus, they learn that the derivative (with respect to `x`) of `a*x` is `a`, and the derivative of `sin(x)` is `cos(x)`, etc.
And they learn how to combine simple rules, via [the chain rule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chain_rule), to differentiate complicated functions.
ChainRules is a programmatic repository of that knowledge, with the generalizations to higher dimensions.

[Autodiff (AD)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_differentiation) tools roughly work by reducing a problem down to simple parts that they know the rules for, and then combining those rules.
Knowing rules for more complicated functions speeds up the autodiff process as it doesn't have to break things down as much.
For an

**ChainRules is an AD-independent collection of rules to use in a differentiation system.**

### `rrule` and `frule`

!!! terminology "`rrule` and `frule`"
    `rrule` and `frule` are ChainRules specific terms.

>     There exact functioning is fairly ChainRules specific, though other tools may do similar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Their exact functioning is fairly ChainRules specific, though other tools have similar functions.
```

### The propagators: pushforward and pullback

!!! terminology "pushforward and pullback"

    _Pushforward_ and _pullback_ are fancy words that the autodiff community adopted from Differential Geometry.
    The are broadly in agreement with the use of [pullback](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pullback_(differential_geometry)) and [pushforward](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pushforward_(differential)) in differential geometry.
    But any geometer will tell you these are the super-boring flat cases. Some will also frown at you.
    Other terms that may be used include for _pullback_ the **backpropagator**, and by analogy for _pushforward_ the **forwardpropagator**, thus these are the _propagators_.
    These are also good names because effectively they propagate wiggles and wobbles through them, via the chainrule.
    (the term **backpropagator** may originate with ["Lambda The Ultimate Backpropagator"](http://www-bcl.cs.may.ie/~barak/papers/toplas-reverse.pdf) by Bearlmutter and Siskind, 2008)

#### Core Idea

 - The **pushforward** takes a wiggle in the _input space_, and tells what wobble you would create in the output space, by passing it through the function.

>  - The **pullback** takes a wobble in the _output space_, and tells you what wiggle you would need to make in the _input_ space to achieve it.

Reviewer 2: This is still misleading for the pullback. Reposting a comment that got lost:

The pullback doesn’t take an output wobble and produce an input wiggle (that would be left-multiplying by the inverse of the Jacobian); it takes an output sensitivity (“how much does the loss function wobble when you wiggle the output”) and produces an input sensitivity (“how much does the loss function wobble when you wiggle the input”). This corresponds to left-multiplying by the adjoint of the Jacobian—an important distinction!

If the output is the scalar loss and you call the pullback on the scalar 1, then it will produce the gradient of the input (also a vector in the cotangent space, aka a wobble-wiggle ratio).

Author: I have not yet gone though your feedback.
I guess it got lost when we made changes relating to typos.
Thanks for reposting it

#### The anatomy of pushforward and pullback

For our function `foo(args...; kwargs) = Y`:

The pushforward is a function:

```julia
function pushforward(Δself, Δargs...)
    ...
    return ∂Y
end
```

> The input to the pushforward is often called the _pertubation_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The input to the pushforward is often called the _perturbation_.
```

> If the function is `y = f(x)` often the pushforward will be written `ẏ = pushforward(ḟ, ẋ)`.

Reviewer 3: Here, a different symbols for the returned value is used instead of `∂Y`

Reviewer: yes, i believe that is the point this sentence is trying to make (@oxinabox?) ...but maybe it could be clearer somehow?

Author: ```suggestion
If the function is `y = f(x)` often the pushforward will be written `ẏ = pushforward(ḟ, ẋ)`.
(`ẏ` is commonly used to represent the permutation for `y`)
```

    At the end of the day, they are all _wiggles_ or _wobbles_.

### Self derivative `Δself`, `∂self` etc.

!!! terminology
    To my knowledge there is no standard terminology for this.
    Other good names might be `Δinternal`/`∂internal`.

From the mathematical perspective, one may have been wondering what all this `Δself`, `∂self` is.
After all a function with two inputs, say `f(a, b)`, only has two partial derivatives:
``\dfrac{∂f}{∂a}``, ``\dfrac{∂f}{∂b}``.
Why then does a `pushforward` take in this extra `Δself`, and why does a `pullback` return this extra `∂self`?

The reason is that in Julia the function `f` may itself have internal fields.
For example a closure has the fields it closes over; a callable object (i.e. a functor) like a `Flux.Dense` has the fields of that object.

**Thus every function is treated as having the extra implicit argument `self`, which captures those fields.**
So every `pushforward` takes in an extra argument, which is ignored unless the original function had fields.

> In is common to write `function foo_pushforward(_, Δargs...)` in the case when `foo` does not have fields.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It is common to write `function foo_pushforward(_, Δargs...)` in the case when `foo` does not have fields.
```

    - returned by `ffrule`
    - takes input space wiggles, gives output space wobbles
    - 1 argument per original function argument + 1 for the function itself
    - 1 return per original function return

- **Pullback**
   - returned by `rrule`
   - takes output space wobbles, gives input space wiggles
   - 1 argument per original function return
   - 1 return per original function argument + 1 for the function itself

#### Pushforward/Pullback and Total Derivative/Gradient

The most trivial use of `frule` and returned `pushforward` is to calculate the [Total Derivative](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_derivative):

```julia
y, f_pushforward = frule(f, a, b, c)
ẏ = f_pushforward(1, 1, 1, 1)  # for appropriate `1`-like perturbation.
```

Then we have that `ẏ` is the _total derivative_ of `f` at `(a, b, c)`, written mathematically as ``df_{(a,b,c)}``

Similarly, the most trivial use of `rrule` and returned `pullback` is to calculate the [Gradient](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gradient):

```julia
y, f_pullback = rrule(f, a, b, c)
∇f = f_pullback(1)  # for appropriate `1`-like seed.
s̄, ā, b̄, c̄ = ∇f
```
Then we have that `∇f` is the _gradient_ of `f` at `(a, b, c)`.

> And we thus have the partial derivatives ``f̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂f}``, ``ā` = \dfrac{∂f}{∂a}``, ``b̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂b}``, ``c̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂c}``, including the and the self-partial derivative, ``f̄``.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
And we thus have the partial derivatives ``f̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂f}``, ``ā` = \dfrac{∂f}{∂a}``, ``b̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂b}``, ``c̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂c}``, including the self-partial derivative, ``f̄``.
```

Reviewer 5: `f̄` stated twice

Reviewer 6: ``f̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂f}`` looks like it should be always 1, I think you should use a different symbol for internal fields of the function (maybe s)?

Author: Yeah, I was thinking `\phi`
but for now I say self.
Mostly.
So this is wrong for sure.

Author: ```suggestion
And we thus have the partial derivatives ``s̄elf, = \dfrac{∂f}{∂s̄elf}``, ``ā` = \dfrac{∂f}{∂a}``, ``b̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂b}``, ``c̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂c}``, including the and the self-partial derivative, ``s̄elf,``.
```

This makes it a lot simpler to debug from the stacktrace.

### Write tests

There are fairly decent tools for writing tests based on [FiniteDifferences.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/FiniteDifferences.jl).
They are in [`tests/test_utils.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl/blob/master/test/test_util.jl).
Take a look at existing test and you should see how to do stuff.

!!! warning
    Use finite differencing to test derivatives.
    Don't use analytical derivations for derivatives in the tests!
    Since the rules are analytic expressions, re-writing those same expressions in the tests
    can not be an effective way to test, and will give misleading test coverage.

### CAS systems are your friends.

It is very easy to check gradients or derivatives with a computer algebra system (CAS) like [WolframAlpha](https://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=gradient+atan2%28x%2Cy%29).

------------------------------------------

## FAQ

### What is up with the different symbols?

 - `Δx` is the input to a propagator, (i.e a _seed_ for a _pullback_; or a _perturbation_ for a _pushforward_)

>  - `∂x` is the output of a propagator

Reviewer 4: If this is convention it should go above before talking about `Δself` and `∂self`

Author: This is the FAQ.
it is a ummary of the conventions.
They are not not defined in place

 - `dx` could be anything, including a pullback. It really should not show up outside of tests.

>  - `v̇` is a derivative of the input moving forward: ``v̇ = \frac{∂v}{∂x}`` for input ``x``, intermediate value ``v``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `v̇` is the derivative of a variable `v` wrt the input `x`: ``v̇ = \frac{∂v}{∂x}`` for input ``x``, intermediate value ``v``.
```

>  - `v̄` is a derivative of the output moving backward: ``v̄ = \frac{∂y}{∂v}`` for output ``y``, intermediate value ``v``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `v̄` is the derivative of the output `y` wrt a variable `v`: ``v̄ = \frac{∂y}{∂v}`` for output ``y``, intermediate value ``v``.
```

**ChainRules is an AD-independent collection of rules to use in a differentiation system.**

### `rrule` and `frule`

!!! terminology "`rrule` and `frule`"
    `rrule` and `frule` are ChainRules specific terms.
    Their exact functioning is fairly ChainRules specific, though other tools have similar functions.
    The core notion is sometimes called _custom AD primitives_, _custom adjoints_, _custom sensitivities_.

The rules are encoded as `rrules` and `frules`, for use in reverse-mode and forward-mode differentiation respectively.

The `rrule` for some function `foo`, which takes the positional argument `args` and keyword argument `kwargs`, is written:

```julia
function rrule(::typeof(foo), args; kwargs...)
    ...
    return y, pullback
end
```
where `y` must be equal to `foo(args; kwargs...)`, and `pullback` is a function to propagate the derivative information backwards at that point (more later).

Similarly, the `frule` is written:
```julia
function frule(::typeof(foo), args; kwargs...)
    ...
    return y, pushforward
end
```
again `y = foo(args; kwargs...)`, and `pushforward` is a function to propagate the derivative information forwards at that point (more later).

> Almost always the _pushforward_/_pullback_ will be declared locally within the `ffrule`/`rrule`, and will be a _closure_ over some of the other arguments.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Almost always the _pushforward_/_pullback_ will be declared locally within the `frule`/`rrule` and will be a _closure_ over some of the other arguments.
```

### The propagators: pushforward and pullback

!!! terminology "pushforward and pullback"

    _Pushforward_ and _pullback_ are fancy words that the autodiff community adopted from Differential Geometry.
    The are broadly in agreement with the use of [pullback](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pullback_(differential_geometry)) and [pushforward](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pushforward_(differential)) in differential geometry.
    But any geometer will tell you these are the super-boring flat cases. Some will also frown at you.
    Other terms that may be used include for _pullback_ the **backpropagator**, and by analogy for _pushforward_ the **forwardpropagator**, thus these are the _propagators_.

>     These are also good names because effectively they propagate wiggles and wobbles through them, via the chainrule.

Author: Some people really like it, some people don't.
I should probably pair each meantion of wibbles and wobbles with some math,

    (the term **backpropagator** may originate with ["Lambda The Ultimate Backpropagator"](http://www-bcl.cs.may.ie/~barak/papers/toplas-reverse.pdf) by Bearlmutter and Siskind, 2008)

#### Core Idea

 - The **pushforward** takes a wiggle in the _input space_, and tells what wobble you would create in the output space, by passing it through the function.
 - The **pullback** takes a wobble in the _output space_, and tells you what wiggle you would need to make in the _input_ space to achieve it.

#### The anatomy of pushforward and pullback

For our function `foo(args...; kwargs) = Y`:

The pushforward is a function:

```julia
function pushforward(Δself, Δargs...)
    ...
    return ∂Y
end
```

The input to the pushforward is often called the _perturbation_.
If the function is `y = f(x)` often the pushforward will be written `ẏ = pushforward(ḟ, ẋ)`.

> (`ẏ` is commonly used to represent the permutation for `y`)

Author: ```suggestion
(`ẏ` is commonly used to represent the pertubation for `y`)
```

!!! note

    There is one `Δarg` per `arg` to the original function.

>     The `Δargs` are similar in type/structure to the corresponding inputs `args` (`Δself` is explained below).

Author: added
```
### Where are the gradients for keyword arguments?
_pullbacks_ do not return a gradient for keyword arguments;
similarly _pushfowards_ do not accept a pertubation for keyword arguments.
This is because in practice functions are very rarely differentiable with respect to keyword arguments.
As a rule keyword arguments tend to control side-effects, like logging verbsoity,
or to be functionality changing to perform a different operation, e.g. `dims=3`, and thus not differentiable.
To the best of our knowledge no julia AD system, with support for the definition of custom primatives, supports differentating with respect to keyword arguments.
At some point in the future ChainRules may support these. Maybe.
```

    The `∂Y` are similar in type/structure to the original function's output `Y`.
    In particular if that function returned a tuple then `∂Y` will be a tuple of same size.

The pullback is a function:

```julia
function pullback(ΔY)
    ...
    return ∂self, ∂args...
end
```

The input to the pullback is often called the _seed_.
If the function is `y = f(x)` often the pullback will be written `x̄ = pullback(ȳ)`.

!!! note

    The pullback returns one `∂arg` per `arg` to the original function, plus one for the fields of the function itself (explained below).

!!! terminology
    Sometimes _perturbation_, _seed_, and _sensitivity_ will be used interchangeably, depending on task/subfield (sensitivity analysis and perturbation theory are apparently very big on just calling everything _sensitivity_ or _perturbation_ respectively.)
    At the end of the day, they are all _wiggles_ or _wobbles_.

### Self derivative `Δself`, `∂self` etc.

!!! terminology
    To my knowledge there is no standard terminology for this.
    Other good names might be `Δinternal`/`∂internal`.

From the mathematical perspective, one may have been wondering what all this `Δself`, `∂self` is.

> After all a function with two inputs, say `f(a, b)`, only has two partial derivatives:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
After all, a function with two inputs, say `f(a, b)`, only has two partial derivatives:
```

``\dfrac{∂f}{∂a}``, ``\dfrac{∂f}{∂b}``.
Why then does a `pushforward` take in this extra `Δself`, and why does a `pullback` return this extra `∂self`?

The reason is that in Julia the function `f` may itself have internal fields.
For example a closure has the fields it closes over; a callable object (i.e. a functor) like a `Flux.Dense` has the fields of that object.

**Thus every function is treated as having the extra implicit argument `self`, which captures those fields.**

> So every `pushforward` takes in an extra argument, which is ignored unless the original function had fields.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
So every `pushforward` takes in an extra argument, which is ignored unless the original function has fields.
```

In is common to write `function foo_pushforward(_, Δargs...)` in the case when `foo` does not have fields.

> Similarly every `pullback` return an extra `∂self`, which for things without fields is the constant `NO_FIELDS`, indicating there are no fields within the function itself.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Similarly every `pullback` returns an extra `∂self`, which for things without fields is the constant `NO_FIELDS`, indicating there are no fields within the function itself.
```

#### Pushforward / Pullback summary

- **Pushforward:**

>     - returned by `ffrule`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - returned by `frule`
```

    - takes input space wiggles, gives output space wobbles
    - 1 argument per original function argument + 1 for the function itself
    - 1 return per original function return

- **Pullback**
   - returned by `rrule`
   - takes output space wobbles, gives input space wiggles
   - 1 argument per original function return
   - 1 return per original function argument + 1 for the function itself

#### Pushforward/Pullback and Total Derivative/Gradient

The most trivial use of `frule` and returned `pushforward` is to calculate the [Total Derivative](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_derivative):

```julia
y, f_pushforward = frule(f, a, b, c)
ẏ = f_pushforward(1, 1, 1, 1)  # for appropriate `1`-like perturbation.
```

> Then we have that `ẏ` is the _total derivative_ of `f` at `(a, b, c)`, written mathematically as ``df_{(a,b,c)}``

Reviewer 5: This doesn't help the reader understand what the total derivative is. An example would be nice.

Reviewer 6: Total derivative at a point can be thought of as a linear function, you could maybe use this interpretation and explain why `f_pushforward` get for four `1`s as arguments.

Author: I have a link to the wikipedia page above.

Reviewer 5: Whoops, missed that. This is fine then.

Similarly, the most trivial use of `rrule` and returned `pullback` is to calculate the [Gradient](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gradient):

```julia
y, f_pullback = rrule(f, a, b, c)
∇f = f_pullback(1)  # for appropriate `1`-like seed.

> s̄, ā, b̄, c̄ = ∇f

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
f̄, ā, b̄, c̄ = ∇f
```

Author: ```suggestion
s̄elf, ā, b̄, c̄ = ∇f
```

Reviewer: time to change `self` -> `φ` (`\varphi`)

Or you want to wait to change it in the code at the same time?

```
Then we have that `∇f` is the _gradient_ of `f` at `(a, b, c)`.
And we thus have the partial derivatives ``f̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂f}``, ``ā` = \dfrac{∂f}{∂a}``, ``b̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂b}``, ``c̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂c}``, including the and the self-partial derivative, ``f̄``.

### Differentials

The values that come back from pullbacks or pushforwards are not always the same type as the input/outputs of the original function.

> They are differentials; differency-equivalents.

Reviewer 6: Are you sure "differency" is the word you want to use here? It doesn't seem to be used frequently in this context https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/differency .

Author: It is a word I made up. It definately is not a word that should be here.
I just needed to get something down.

I want to capture the idea that this is the result of some difference expression.
That is to say it doesn't need to be the same type as the input,
I guess the throw math at it,
For some domain 𝔽,
the difference-ish domain 𝔻 is a domain that supports
```
- : 𝔽×𝔻 → 𝔽
+ : 𝔻×𝔻 → 𝔻
* : ℝ×𝔻 → 𝔻
```

Interestly, that isn't exactly what we implement, but at the conceptual level that is what it is.

Reviewer 6: I think it should be 
    - : 𝔽×𝔽 → 𝔻
right? And probably also
    + : 𝔽×𝔻 → 𝔽

This looks like a rough description of the fact that total derivative at a point is a linear function: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_derivative . Linear functions can be added, subtracted and multiplied by a scalar.

Author: `- : 𝔽×𝔽 → 𝔻` is basically how we define `𝔻`, but I don't know that we need it.
But we do need `- : 𝔽×𝔻 → 𝔽` to be able to do gradient desent.
I suspect combined with some other feature we need that I am neglecting to mention we get that.

I was thinking that.
`+ : 𝔽×𝔻 → 𝔽` emerges as a consiquence of `- : 𝔽×𝔻 → 𝔽` and `* : ℝ×𝔻 → 𝔻`
and `-1∈ℝ`
and some properties of what `*` has to do.

> This looks like a rough description of the fact that total derivative at a point is a linear function:

Seems right, yes.

Author: So anyway, what is a nice short-way and handway of capturing that differentials have these properties.

Reviewer 6: > `+ : 𝔽×𝔻 → 𝔽` emerges as a consiquence of `- : 𝔽×𝔻 → 𝔽` and `* : ℝ×𝔻 → 𝔻`
> and `-1∈ℝ`

OK, I understand now what you mean.

> So anyway, what is a nice short-way and handway of capturing that differentials have these properties.

Maybe you could write that `+` and `*` make differentials at a certain point a linear space (or vector space). It is less vague than "which let them act as mathematical objects".

Author: Its actually not a vector space.
The opterators they actually have are weirder still.
(like it is pretty odd you can multiply them.)

Author: I think for this section at least I am happy with what is there now.
Which talks about them representing the difference of two things of the original type

We might want more later for a more detailed page on differentials

Reviewer 6: Well, at least 𝔻 is a vector space, right? There is of course a lot more structure there.

A differential might be such a regular type, like a `Number`, or a `Matrix`, or it might be one of the `AbstractDifferential` subtypes.

Differentials support a number of operations.

> Most importantly: `+` and `*` which lets them act as mathematically objects.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Most importantly: `+` and `*`, which let them act as mathematical objects.
```

Reviewer 6: Is it documented anywhere which kinds of methods are expected for differentials? Multiplication by numbers (scalars)? Unary/binary minus maybe?

Author: Yeah it is in the docstring for AbstractDifferential.
Which seems the right place for this kinda precision,
(vs in this kinda overview docs)

And `extern` which converts `AbstractDifferential` types into a conventional non-ChainRules type.

The most important `AbstractDifferential`s when getting started are the ones about avoiding work:

 - `Thunk`: this is a deferred computation. A thunk is a [word for a zero argument closure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thunk). A computation wrapped in a `@thunk` doesn't get evaluated until `extern` is called on the `Thunk`. More on thunks later.
 - `One`, `Zero`: There are special representations of `1` and `0`. They do great things around avoiding expanding `Thunks` in multiplication and (for `Zero`) addition.

#### Other `AbstractDifferential`s: don't worry about them right now
 - `Wirtinger`: it is complex. The docs need to be better. [Read the links in this issue](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRulesCore.jl/issues/40).
 - `Casted`: it implements broadcasting mechanics. See [#10](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRulesCore.jl/issues/10)

>  - `InplaceableThunk`: it is like a Thunk but it can do `store!` and `accumulate!` in-place.

Reviewer 6: This is the only place in this docs where `store!` and `accumulate!` are mentioned, some reference or explanation would be helpful.

Author: Explaining them would go against the point of this section which is "Don't worry about them right now"

They have docstrings.

They might very well go away at some point, or change to be unrecognizable.

c̄ = 1;  # ∂c/∂c
_, b̄ = c_pullback(extern(c̄));     # ∂c/∂b
_, _, ā = b_pullback(extern(b̄));  # ∂c/∂a
_, x̄ = a_pullback(extern(ā));     # ∂c/∂x = ∂f/∂x
extern(x̄)
# -2.0638950738662625

#### Find dfoo/dx via frules

# Unlike with rrule, we can interleave evaluation and derivative evaluation
x = 3;
ẋ = 1;  # ∂x/∂x
nofields = NamedTuple();  # ∂self/∂self

a, a_pushforward = frule(sin, x);
ȧ = a_pushforward(nofields, extern(ẋ));     # ∂a/∂x

b, b_pushforward = frule(*, 2, a);
ḃ = b_pushforward(nofields, 0, extern(ȧ));  # ∂b/∂x = ∂b/∂a⋅∂a/∂x

c, c_pushforward = frule(asin, b);
ċ = c_pushforward(nofields, extern(ḃ));     # ∂c/∂x = ∂c/∂b⋅∂b/∂x = ∂f/∂x
extern(ċ)
# -2.0638950738662625

#### Find dfoo/dx via finite-differences

using FiniteDifferences
central_fdm(5, 1)(foo, x)
# -2.0638950738670734

#### Find dfoo/dx via finite-differences ForwardDiff.jl
using ForwardDiff
ForwardDiff.derivative(foo, x)
# -2.0638950738662625

#### Find dfoo/dx via finite-differences Zygote.jl
using Zygote
Zygote.gradient(foo, x)
# (-2.0638950738662625,)
```

 -------------------------------

## On writing good `rrule` / `frule` methods

### Return Zero or One

> Rather than `0` or `1` or even rather than `zeros(n)`, `ones(n)`, or the identity matrix `I`.

Reviewer 6: A verb in this sentence would be helpful. I guess it should be read as one sentence together with the header but it looks weird.

Author: Yeah, seems like half this sentence is missing.

Author: ```suggestion
The `Zero()` and `One()` differential objects exist as an alternative to directly returning
`0` or `zeros(n)`, and `1` or `I`.
They allow more optimal computation when chaining pullbacks/pushforwards, to avoid work.
They should be used where possible.
```

### Use `Thunk`s appropriately:

If work is only required for one of the returned differentials, then it should be wrapped in a `@thunk` (potentially using a `begin`-`end` block).

If there are multiple return values, their computation should almost always be wrapped in a `@thunk`.

> Do _not_ wrap _variables_ in a `@thunk`, wrap the _computations_ that fill those variables in `@thunk`:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Do _not_ wrap _variables_ in a `@thunk`; wrap the _computations_ that fill those variables in `@thunk`:
```

Take a look at existing test and you should see how to do stuff.

!!! warning
    Use finite differencing to test derivatives.
    Don't use analytical derivations for derivatives in the tests!
    Since the rules are analytic expressions, re-writing those same expressions in the tests
    can not be an effective way to test, and will give misleading test coverage.

### CAS systems are your friends.

It is very easy to check gradients or derivatives with a computer algebra system (CAS) like [WolframAlpha](https://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=gradient+atan2%28x%2Cy%29).

------------------------------------------

## FAQ

### What is up with the different symbols?

 - `Δx` is the input to a propagator, (i.e a _seed_ for a _pullback_; or a _perturbation_ for a _pushforward_)
 - `∂x` is the output of a propagator
 - `dx` could be anything, including a pullback. It really should not show up outside of tests.
 - `v̇` is a derivative of the input moving forward: ``v̇ = \frac{∂v}{∂x}`` for input ``x``, intermediate value ``v``.
 - `v̄` is a derivative of the output moving backward: ``v̄ = \frac{∂y}{∂v}`` for output ``y``, intermediate value ``v``.

>  - `Ω` is often used as the return value of the function having the rule found for. Especially, (but not exclusively.) for scalar functions.

Reviewer 6: The first sentence doesn't sound correct. And there is a dot after "exclusively".

Author: Better but not perfect.

     - `ΔΩ` is thus a seed for the pullback.
     - `∂Ω` is thus the output of a pushforward.

### Why does `frule` and `rrule` return the function evaluation?

You might wonder why `frule(f, x)` returns `f(x)` and the pushforward for `f` at `x`, and similarly for `rrule` returing `f(x)` and the pullback for `f` at `x`.
Why not just return the pushforward/pullback, and let the user call `f(x)` to get the answer seperately?

> Their are two reasons the rules also create the `f(x)`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
There are two reasons the rules also calculate the `f(x)`.
```

# Then the backward pass calculating gradients
c̄ = 1;  # ∂c/∂c
_, b̄ = c_pullback(extern(c̄));     # ∂c/∂b
_, _, ā = b_pullback(extern(b̄));  # ∂c/∂a
_, x̄ = a_pullback(extern(ā));     # ∂c/∂x = ∂f/∂x
extern(x̄)
# -2.0638950738662625

#### Find dfoo/dx via frules

# Unlike with rrule, we can interleave evaluation and derivative evaluation
x = 3;
ẋ = 1;  # ∂x/∂x
nofields = NamedTuple();  # ∂self/∂self

a, a_pushforward = frule(sin, x);
ȧ = a_pushforward(nofields, extern(ẋ));     # ∂a/∂x

b, b_pushforward = frule(*, 2, a);
ḃ = b_pushforward(nofields, 0, extern(ȧ));  # ∂b/∂x = ∂b/∂a⋅∂a/∂x

c, c_pushforward = frule(asin, b);
ċ = c_pushforward(nofields, extern(ḃ));     # ∂c/∂x = ∂c/∂b⋅∂b/∂x = ∂f/∂x
extern(ċ)
# -2.0638950738662625

#### Find dfoo/dx via finite-differences

using FiniteDifferences
central_fdm(5, 1)(foo, x)
# -2.0638950738670734

#### Find dfoo/dx via finite-differences ForwardDiff.jl
using ForwardDiff
ForwardDiff.derivative(foo, x)
# -2.0638950738662625

#### Find dfoo/dx via finite-differences Zygote.jl
using Zygote
Zygote.gradient(foo, x)
# (-2.0638950738662625,)
```

 -------------------------------

## On writing good `rrule` / `frule` methods

> ### Return Zero or One

Author: ```suggestion
### Use `Zero()` or `One()` as return value
```

    - returned by `frule`
    - takes input space wiggles, gives output space wobbles
    - 1 argument per original function argument + 1 for the function itself
    - 1 return per original function return

- **Pullback**
   - returned by `rrule`
   - takes output space wobbles, gives input space wiggles
   - 1 argument per original function return
   - 1 return per original function argument + 1 for the function itself

#### Pushforward/Pullback and Total Derivative/Gradient

The most trivial use of `frule` and returned `pushforward` is to calculate the [Total Derivative](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_derivative):

```julia
y, f_pushforward = frule(f, a, b, c)
ẏ = f_pushforward(1, 1, 1, 1)  # for appropriate `1`-like perturbation.
```

Then we have that `ẏ` is the _total derivative_ of `f` at `(a, b, c)`, written mathematically as ``df_{(a,b,c)}``

Similarly, the most trivial use of `rrule` and returned `pullback` is to calculate the [Gradient](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gradient):

```julia
y, f_pullback = rrule(f, a, b, c)
∇f = f_pullback(1)  # for appropriate `1`-like seed.
s̄elf, ā, b̄, c̄ = ∇f
```
Then we have that `∇f` is the _gradient_ of `f` at `(a, b, c)`.

> And we thus have the partial derivatives ``s̄elf, = \dfrac{∂f}{∂s̄elf}``, ``ā` = \dfrac{∂f}{∂a}``, ``b̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂b}``, ``c̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂c}``, including the and the self-partial derivative, ``s̄elf,``.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
And we thus have the partial derivatives ``\overline{\mathrm{self}}, = \dfrac{∂f}{∂\mathrm{self}}``, ``ā` = \dfrac{∂f}{∂a}``, ``b̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂b}``, ``c̄ = \dfrac{∂f}{∂c}``, including the and the self-partial derivative, ``\overline{\mathrm{self}}``.
```

Reviewer 5: If we're going all-TeX, `\partial` instead of `∂`.

Author: Is this not rendering right already?
I thought mathjax was happy with a TeX unicode mix

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
And we thus have the partial derivatives ``\overline{\mathrm{self}}, = \dfrac{∂f}{∂\mathrm{self}}``, ``\overline{a} = \dfrac{∂f}{∂a}``, ``\overline{b} = \dfrac{∂f}{∂b}``, ``\overline{c} = \dfrac{∂f}{∂c}``, including the and the self-partial derivative, ``\overline{\mathrm{self}}``.
```
The Unicode modifiers often render quite weirdly, so I think this should look better

Author: I am very saddened by this

Using ChainRules directly also helps get a feel for it.

```julia
using ChainRules

function foo(x)
    a = sin(x)
    b = 2a
    c = asin(b)
    return c
end

#### Find dfoo/dx via rrules

# First the forward pass, accumulating rules
x = 3;
a, a_pullback = rrule(sin, x);
b, b_pullback = rrule(*, 2, a);
c, c_pullback = rrule(asin, b)

# Then the backward pass calculating gradients
c̄ = 1;  # ∂c/∂c
_, b̄ = c_pullback(extern(c̄));     # ∂c/∂b
_, _, ā = b_pullback(extern(b̄));  # ∂c/∂a
_, x̄ = a_pullback(extern(ā));     # ∂c/∂x = ∂f/∂x
extern(x̄)
# -2.0638950738662625

#### Find dfoo/dx via frules

# Unlike with rrule, we can interleave evaluation and derivative evaluation
x = 3;
ẋ = 1;  # ∂x/∂x
nofields = NamedTuple();  # ∂self/∂self

a, a_pushforward = frule(sin, x);
ȧ = a_pushforward(nofields, extern(ẋ));     # ∂a/∂x

b, b_pushforward = frule(*, 2, a);
ḃ = b_pushforward(nofields, 0, extern(ȧ));  # ∂b/∂x = ∂b/∂a⋅∂a/∂x

c, c_pushforward = frule(asin, b);
ċ = c_pushforward(nofields, extern(ḃ));     # ∂c/∂x = ∂c/∂b⋅∂b/∂x = ∂f/∂x
extern(ċ)
# -2.0638950738662625

#### Find dfoo/dx via finite-differences

using FiniteDifferences
central_fdm(5, 1)(foo, x)
# -2.0638950738670734

> #### Find dfoo/dx via finite-differences ForwardDiff.jl

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
#### Find dfoo/dx via ForwardDiff.jl
```

using ForwardDiff
ForwardDiff.derivative(foo, x)
# -2.0638950738662625

> #### Find dfoo/dx via finite-differences Zygote.jl

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
#### Find dfoo/dx via Zygote.jl
```

[ChainRules.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl) provides a variety of common utilities that can be used by downstream automatic differentiation (AD) tools to define and execute forward-, reverse-, and mixed-mode primitives.

### Introduction:
ChainRules is all about providing a rich set of rules for doing differentiation.
When a person does introductory calculus, they learn that the derivative (with respect to `x`)
of `a*x` is `a`, and the derivative of `sin(x)` is `cos(x)`, etc.
And they learn how to combine simple rules, via the chain rule, to differentiate complicated functions.
ChainRules.jl basically a progamatic repository of that knowledge, with the generalizations to higher dimensions.

> Autodiff (AD) tools roughly work by reducting a program down to simple parts that they know the rules for,

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Autodiff (AD) tools roughly work by reducing a problem down to simple parts that they know the rules for,
```

and then combining those rules.
Knowing rules for more complicated functions speeds up the autodiff process as it doesn't have to break things down as much.

** ChainRules is an AD independent collection of rules to use in an differentiation system **

### `rrule` and `frule`

!!! Terminology "`rrule` and `frule`"

    `rrule` and `frule` are ChainRules.jl specific terms.
    And there exact functioning is kind of ChainRule specific,
    though other tools may do similar.
    The core notion is sometimes called
    _Custom AD primitives_, _custom adjoints_, _custom sensitivities_.

The rules are encoded as `rrules` and `frules`,

> for use in forward-mode and reverse-mode differentiation respectively.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
for use in reverse-mod and forward-mode differentiation respectively.
```

> the `rrule` for some function `foo`, taking positional arguments `args` and keyword arguments kwargs is written:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The `rrule` for some function `foo`, takes the positional argument `args` and keyword argument `kwargs` is written:
```

```julia
function rrule(::typeof(foo), args; kwargs...)
    ...
    return y, pullback
end
```
where `y` must be equal to `foo(args; kwargs...)`,
and _pullback_ is a function to propagate the derivative information backwards at that point (more later).
Often but not always it is calculated directly.

> the exeception is we can calculate it indirect to make

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The exception is that we can calculate it indirectly to make
```

    The are broadly in agreement with the use of these terms in differential geometry. But any geometer will tell you these are the super-boring flat cases. Some will also frown at you.
    Other terms that may be used include for _pullback_ the **backpropagator**, and by analogy for _pushforward_ the **forwardpropagator**, thus these are the _propagators_.
    These are also good names because effectively they propagate wibbles and wobbles through them, via the chainrule.
    (the term **backpropagator** may originate with ["Lambda The Ultimate Backpropagator"](http://www-bcl.cs.may.ie/~barak/papers/toplas-reverse.pdf) by Bearlmutter and Siskind, 2008)

#### Core Important Idea:
 - The **Pushforward** takes a wiggle in the _input space_, and tells what wobble you would create in the output space, by passing it through the function.
 - The **Pullback** takes a wobble in the _output space_, and tells you what wiggle you would need to make in the _input_ space to achieve it.

#### The anatomy of pushforward and pullback

For our function `foo(args...; kwargs) = Y`:

The pushforward is a function:
```julia
function pushforward(Δself, Δargs...)
    ...
    return ∂Y
end
```

> Note that there is one `Δargs...` per `arg` to the orginal function, and they are similar in type/structure to the ccorresponding inputs.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
**Note:** that there is one `Δargs...` per `arg` to the original function, and they are similar in type/structure to the corresponding inputs.
```

Plus the `Δself` (don't worry we will be back to explain this soon).
The `∂Y` will be similar in type/structure to the original function's output `Y`.
In particular if that function returned a tuple then `∂Y` will be a tuple of same size.

The input to the pushforward is often called the _pertubation_.
If the function is `y=f(x)` often the pushforward will be written `ẏ=pushforward(ẋ)`.

The pullback is a function
```julia
function pullback(ΔY)
    ...
    return ∂self, ∂args...
end
```

> Note that the pullback returns one `∂arg` per original `arg` to the function, plus one for the s

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
**Note:** that the pullback returns one `∂arg` per original `arg` to the function, plus one for the `s`
```

Should `s` be `sensitivity` here?

Author: `s` should be `function itself`.

```suggestion
**Note:** that the pullback returns one `∂arg` per original `arg` to the function, plus one for the fields of the function itself (again will get to that below).
```

The input to the pullback is often called the _seed_.
If the function is `y=f(x)` often the pullback will be written `ȳ=pullback(x̄)`.

!!! Terminology:
    Sometimes _pertubation_, _seed_, _sensitivity_ will be used interchangeably, depending on task/subfield (_sensitivity_ analysis and perturbation analysis are apparently very big on just calling everying _sensitivity_ or _pertubation_ respectively.)

>     At the end of the day they are all _wibbles_ or _wobbles_.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
At the end of the day they are all _wibbles_ or _wobbles_.
```

Can you bring this up a line to make the source look more clean?

Author: This is actually a julia documentor specific markdown extension,
that will render ad a pretty block.

I think it needs to be indented (not 100% sure though)

https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/stdlib/Markdown/#Markdown-Syntax-Extensions-1

Author: I checked with someone who knows and yes the indent is required.
(too bad code it hurts  github's renderer)

> ### self derivative `Δself`, `∂self` etc.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
### Self derivative `Δself`, `∂self` etc.
```

!!! Terminology

>     To my knowledge there is no standard termanology for this.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
    To my knowledge there is no standard terminology for this.
```

    Other good names might be `Δinternal`/`∂internal`

From the mathematical perspective,
one may have been wondering what all this `Δself`, `∂self` is.
After all a function with two inputs:
say `f(a, b)` only has two partial derivatives,

> ``\dfrac{∂f}{∂a}``, ``\dfrac{∂f}{∂b}``,

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
<img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?\Large&space;\frac{∂f}{∂a}" />, <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?\Large&space;\frac{∂f}{∂b}" />
```
This does not render out properly in the actual file. Below is what my proposed change renders out:

<img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?\Large&space;\frac{∂f}{∂a}" />, <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?\Large&space;\frac{∂f}{∂b}" />

Author: It should render fine once it goes through Documentor.jl
(aside: that is mad cool!)

why then does the _pushforward_ take in this extra `Δself`,
and why does the _pullback_ return this extra `∂self` ?

The thing is in julia
the function `f` may itself have internal values.
For example a closure has the fields it closes over; and a callable object (i.e. a functor) like a `Flux.Dense` has the fields of that object.

**Thus every function is treated as having the extra implicit argument `self`,
which captures those fields.**
So all _pushforward_ take in a extra argument,
which unless they are for things with fields, they ignore. (thus common to write `function pushforward(_, Δargs...)` in those cases),

> and every _pullback_ return an extra `∂self`,,

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
and every _pullback_ return an extra `∂self`,
```

    - 1 return per orignal function return
- **Pullback**
   -  return by `rrule`
   - takes output space wobbles, gives input space wibbles
   - 1 argument per original function return
   - 1 return per orignal function argument + 1 for the function itself

#### Pushforward/Pullback and Total Derivative/Gradient

The most trivial use of the frule+pushforward is to calculate the [Total Derivative](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_derivative):
```julia
y, pushforward = frule(f, a, b, c)
ẏ = pushforward(1, 1, 1, 1)  # for appropriate `1`-like perturbation.
```
Then we have that
`ẏ` is the _total derivative_ of
`f` at `(a, b, c)`:
written mathematically as ``df_{(a,b,c)}``

Similarly:
The most trivial use of the rrule+pullback is to calculate the [Gradient](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gradient):
```julia
y, pullback = frule(f, a, b, c)
∇f  = pushforward(1) # for appropriate `1`-like seed.
s̄, ā, b̄, c̄ = ∇f
```
Then we have that
`∇f` is the _gradient_ of
`f` at `(a, b, c)`.
And we thus have the partial derivative:
s̄, ā, b̄, c̄.
(Including the and the self-partial derivative,
s̄).
Written mathematically as ``\dfrac{∂f}{∂a}``, ``\dfrac{∂f}{∂b}``, ``\dfrac{∂f}{∂c}``.

> 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
```

### Differentials

The values that come back from pullbacks,
or pushforwards
are not always the same type as the input/outputs of the original function.
They are differentials,
differency-equivalents.
A differential might be such a regular type,
like a Number, or a Matrix,

> or it might be one of the `AbstractDifferencial` subtypes.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
or it might be one of the `AbstractDifferential` subtypes.
```

Differentials support a number of operations.
Most importantly:
`+` and `*` which lets them act as mathematically objects.
And `extern` which converts them into a conventional type.

The most important AbstractDifferentials when getting started are the ones about avoiding work:

 - `Thunk`: this is a deferred computation. A thunk is a [word for a zero argument closure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thunk). An computation wrapped in a `@thunk` doesn't get evaluated until `extern` is called on the `Thunk`. More on thunks later.
 - `One`, `Zero`: There are special representions of `1` and `0`. They do great things around avoiding expanding `Thunks` in multiplication and (for `Zero`) addition.

> 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
```

This was once how all neural network code worked.)

Using ChainRules directly also helped get a feel for it.

```julia
using ChainRules

function foo(x)
    a = sin(x)
    b = 2a
    c = asin(b)
    return c
end;

###
# Find dfoo/dx via rrules

# First the forward pass, accumulating rules
x=3;
a, a_pb = rrule(sin, x);
b, b_pb = rrule(*, 2, a);
c, c_pb = rrule(asin, b)

# Then the backward pass calculating gradients
c̄ = 1;
_, b̄ = c_pb(extern(c̄));
_, _, ā = b_pb(extern(b̄));
_, x̄ = a_pb(extern(ā));
extern(x̄)
# -2.0638950738662625

###
# Find dfoo/dx via frules

# Unlike rrule can interleave evaluation and derivative evaluation
x=3;
ẋ=1;
nofields = NamedTuple();

a, a_pf = frule(sin, x);
ȧ = a_pf(nofields, extern(ẋ));

b, b_pf = frule(*, 2, a);
ḃ = b_pf(nofields, 0, extern(ȧ));

c, c_pf = frule(asin, b);
ċ = c_pf(nofields, extern(ḃ));
extern(ċ)
# -2.0638950738662625

###
# Find dfoo/dx via finite-difference
using FiniteDifferences
central_fdm(5,1)(foo, x)
# -2.0638950738670734

###
# Via ForwardDiff.jl
using ForwardDiff
ForwardDiff.derivative(foo, x)
# -2.0638950738662625

###
# Via Zygote
using Zygote
Zygote.gradient(foo, x)
# (-2.0638950738662625,)

> ```

Author: @wesselb @willtebbutt can have Nabla example?
I tried but failed to get Nabla to do this.

[ChainRules.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl) provides a variety of common utilities that can be used by downstream automatic differentiation (AD) tools to define and execute forward-, reverse-, and mixed-mode primitives.

### Introduction:
ChainRules is all about providing a rich set of rules for doing differentiation.
When a person does introductory calculus, they learn that the derivative (with respect to `x`)
of `a*x` is `a`, and the derivative of `sin(x)` is `cos(x)`, etc.
And they learn how to combine simple rules, via the chain rule, to differentiate complicated functions.

> ChainRules.jl basically a progamatic repository of that knowledge, with the generalizations to higher dimensions.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
ChainRules.jl is a programmatic repository of that knowledge, with the generalizations to higher dimensions.
```

Autodiff (AD) tools roughly work by reducing a problem down to simple parts that they know the rules for,
and then combining those rules.
Knowing rules for more complicated functions speeds up the autodiff process as it doesn't have to break things down as much.

> ** ChainRules is an AD independent collection of rules to use in an differentiation system **

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
** ChainRules is an AD independent collection of rules to use in a differentiation system **
```

### `rrule` and `frule`

!!! Terminology "`rrule` and `frule`"

    `rrule` and `frule` are ChainRules.jl specific terms.

>     And there exact functioning is kind of ChainRule specific,

Reviewer 10: `there` -> `their`

>     though other tools may do similar.

Reviewer 10: `may do similar` what? Perhaps `may have equivalent notions` or so?

    The core notion is sometimes called
    _Custom AD primitives_, _custom adjoints_, _custom sensitivities_.

The rules are encoded as `rrules` and `frules`,
for use in reverse-mode and forward-mode differentiation respectively.

> The `rrule` for some function `foo`, takes the positional argument `args` and keyword argument `kwargs` is written:

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
The `rrule` for some function `foo`, takes the positional argument `args` and keyword argument `kwargs` and is written:
```

Author: ```suggestion
The `rrule` for some function `foo`, which takes the positional argument `args` and keyword argument `kwargs`, is written:
```

```julia
function rrule(::typeof(foo), args; kwargs...)
    ...
    return y, pullback
end
```
where `y` must be equal to `foo(args; kwargs...)`,
and _pullback_ is a function to propagate the derivative information backwards at that point (more later).
Often but not always it is calculated directly.

> The exception is that we can calculate it indirectly to make

Reviewer 11: >The exception is that we can calculate it indirectly to make
the `pullback` faster. (more on _pullback_ later)

I don't know what this is trying to tell me.

Author: It needs an example 
Only example I have is

https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl/pull/91/files#diff-e59f5e7b34490be11e2a82fdb8b831edR105-R123

Or the one in #104

Reviewer 11: Seems a bit in the weeds here. Maybe bring this up in the `pullback` section?

Author: Might be better to put in the FAQ section,
like "Why does rrule/frule also calculate the main result" ?

I think that could be clearer, and there are 2 reasons.
1 is doing it differently to get intermidiary values to use in the propagator (which I mentioned),
the other is if the output is used in the backpropagator (like it is for deriviative of sigmoid).

the `pullback` faster. (more on _pullback_ later)

Similarly, the `frule` is written:
```julia
function frule(::typeof(foo), args; kwargs...)
    ...
    return y, pushforward
end
```
again `y=foo(args, kwargs...)`,
and _pushforward_ is a function to propagate the derivative information forwards at that point (more later).

Almost always the _pushforward_/_pullback_ will be declared locally with-in the `ffrule`/`rrule`, and will be a _closure_ over some of the other arguments.

### The propagators: pushforward and pullback

!!! Terminology "Pushforward and Pullback"

    _Pushforward_ and _Pullback_ are fancy words that the autodiff community recently stole from Differential Geometry.

>     The are broadly in agreement with the use of these terms in differential geometry. But any geometer will tell you these are the super-boring flat cases. Some will also frown at you.

Reviewer 10: `The are` -> `These are`

    Other terms that may be used include for _pullback_ the **backpropagator**, and by analogy for _pushforward_ the **forwardpropagator**, thus these are the _propagators_.
    These are also good names because effectively they propagate wibbles and wobbles through them, via the chainrule.
    (the term **backpropagator** may originate with ["Lambda The Ultimate Backpropagator"](http://www-bcl.cs.may.ie/~barak/papers/toplas-reverse.pdf) by Bearlmutter and Siskind, 2008)

> #### Core Important Idea:

Reviewer 10: Are these ideas consistent with what `pushforward` and `pullback` do? I'm not familiar with ChainRules and its internals, but I anticipated `pushforward` and `pullback` to do the following: Consider a computation `x -> u -> f(u) = v -> y`. Then `pushforward` for `f` turns `du/dx` into `dv/dx`, whereas `pullback` turns `dy/dv` into `dy/du`. So `pushforward` pushes a "sensitivity with respect to the input through the function", whereas `pullback` pulls a "sensitivity with respect to the output back through the function". Perhaps that's what the below convey, not sure... maybe I'm just rambling.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I think the below is accurate for the pushforward but misleading for the pullback. The pullback doesn’t take an output wobble and produce an input wiggle (that would be left-multiplying by the _inverse_ of the Jacobian); it takes an output sensitivity (“how much does the loss function wobble when you wiggle the output”) and produces an input sensitivity (“how much does the loss function wobble when you wiggle the input”). This corresponds to left-multiplying by the _adjoint_ of the Jacobian—an important distinction!

If the output _is_ the scalar loss and you call the pullback on the scalar 1, then it will produce the _gradient_ of the input (also a vector in the cotangent space, aka a wobble-wiggle ratio).

 - The **Pushforward** takes a wiggle in the _input space_, and tells what wobble you would create in the output space, by passing it through the function.
 - The **Pullback** takes a wobble in the _output space_, and tells you what wiggle you would need to make in the _input_ space to achieve it.

#### The anatomy of pushforward and pullback

For our function `foo(args...; kwargs) = Y`:

The pushforward is a function:
```julia
function pushforward(Δself, Δargs...)
    ...
    return ∂Y
end
```

> **Note:** that there is one `Δargs...` per `arg` to the original function, and they are similar in type/structure to the corresponding inputs.

Reviewer 12: Shouldn't it be there is one `Δarg` per `arg`?
Really nice docs btw! I'm finally starting to grasp some of these concepts.

Author: Yes

Author: ```suggestion
**Note:** that there is one `Δarg` per `arg` to the original function, and they (the `Δargs`)  are similar in type/structure to the corresponding inputs (`args`).
```

> Plus the `Δself` (don't worry we will be back to explain this soon).

Reviewer 11: >Plus the `Δself` (don't worry we will be back to explain this soon).

Don't say 'plus' when you're talking about the inclusion of things that could reasonably be added together.

I would just say, "the presence of self will be explained soon".

Author: Good point

Author: ```suggestion
as well as the `Δself` (the presence of `Δself` will be explained soon).
```

The `∂Y` will be similar in type/structure to the original function's output `Y`.
In particular if that function returned a tuple then `∂Y` will be a tuple of same size.

The input to the pushforward is often called the _pertubation_.

> If the function is `y=f(x)` often the pushforward will be written `ẏ=pushforward(ẋ)`.

Reviewer 10: `ẏ=pushforward(ẋ)`: where did `Δself` go here?

Author: Yeah, it should be there as `self` with a dot above it.

The pullback is a function
```julia
function pullback(ΔY)
    ...
    return ∂self, ∂args...
end
```

**Note:** that the pullback returns one `∂arg` per original `arg` to the function, plus one for the fields of the function itself (again will get to that below).

The input to the pullback is often called the _seed_.

> If the function is `y=f(x)` often the pullback will be written `ȳ=pullback(x̄)`.

Reviewer 10: Shouldn't pullback take `ȳ` in and give `x̄` back?

Author: Yes

!!! Terminology:

>     Sometimes _pertubation_, _seed_, _sensitivity_ will be used interchangeably, depending on task/subfield (_sensitivity_ analysis and perturbation analysis are apparently very big on just calling everying _sensitivity_ or _pertubation_ respectively.)

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    Sometimes _perturbation_, _seed_, and _sensitivity_ will be used interchangeably, depending on task/subfield (_sensitivity_ analysis and perturbation theory are apparently very big on just calling everything _sensitivity_ or _perturbation_ respectively.)
```

>     Sometimes _perturbation_, _seed_, and _sensitivity_ will be used interchangeably, depending on task/subfield (_sensitivity_ analysis and perturbation theory are apparently very big on just calling everything _sensitivity_ or _perturbation_ respectively.)

Reviewer 10: Hmm, are sensitivities and perturbations the same thing? I was under the impression that a sensitivity is a `dy/dx`, whereas a perturbation is either a `dx` or `dy`. Thus `input perturbation * sensitivity = output perturbation`. I could be completely off here.

>     At the end of the day they are all _wibbles_ or _wobbles_.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    At the end of the day, they are all _wibbles_ or _wobbles_.
```

> ### Self derivative `Δself`, `∂self` etc.

Reviewer 10: What is the logic between using `Δ`s and `∂`s? The former seems to imply perturbations (i.e. differences) whereas the latter suggest sensitivities (i.e. derivatives).

Author: Idk, It was like that when I inherited it.
I thought it was normal, but turns out it is not.

I kinda like it though.

If we keep it we should document it as a peculiarity of notation

Reviewer 4: I agree with @wesselb, these seemed to be denoting different things to me when I read through

Author: > these seemed to be denoting different things to me when I read through

That are different things.

!!! Terminology
    To my knowledge there is no standard terminology for this.
    Other good names might be `Δinternal`/`∂internal`

From the mathematical perspective,
one may have been wondering what all this `Δself`, `∂self` is.

> After all a function with two inputs:

Reviewer 10: `After all` -> `Consider`?

say `f(a, b)` only has two partial derivatives,
``\dfrac{∂f}{∂a}``, ``\dfrac{∂f}{∂b}``,
why then does the _pushforward_ take in this extra `Δself`,
and why does the _pullback_ return this extra `∂self` ?

The thing is in julia
the function `f` may itself have internal values.

> For example a closure has the fields it closes over; and a callable object (i.e. a functor) like a `Flux.Dense` has the fields of that object.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
For example, a closure has the fields it closes over; and a callable object (i.e. a functor) like a `Flux.Dense` has the fields of that object.
```

**Thus every function is treated as having the extra implicit argument `self`,
which captures those fields.**

> So all _pushforward_ take in a extra argument,

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
So all _pushforward_ take in an extra argument,
```

which unless they are for things with fields, they ignore. (thus common to write `function pushforward(_, Δargs...)` in those cases),
and every _pullback_ return an extra `∂self`,
which is, for things without fields, the constant `NO_FIELDS` which indicates there is no fields within the function itself.

#### Pushforward / Pullback summary
- **Pushforward:**
    - returned by `ffrule`
    - takes input space wibbles, gives output space wobbles

>     - 1 argument per orignal function argument + 1 for the function itself

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    - 1 argument per original function argument + 1 for the function itself
```

>     - 1 return per orignal function return

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    - 1 return per original function return
```

- **Pullback**
   -  return by `rrule`
   - takes output space wobbles, gives input space wibbles
   - 1 argument per original function return

>    - 1 return per orignal function argument + 1 for the function itself

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
   - 1 return per original function argument + 1 for the function itself
```

#### Pushforward/Pullback and Total Derivative/Gradient

The most trivial use of the frule+pushforward is to calculate the [Total Derivative](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_derivative):
```julia
y, pushforward = frule(f, a, b, c)
ẏ = pushforward(1, 1, 1, 1)  # for appropriate `1`-like perturbation.
```
Then we have that
`ẏ` is the _total derivative_ of
`f` at `(a, b, c)`:
written mathematically as ``df_{(a,b,c)}``

Similarly:
The most trivial use of the rrule+pullback is to calculate the [Gradient](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gradient):
```julia

> y, pullback = frule(f, a, b, c)

Author: ```suggestion
y, pullback = rrule(f, a, b, c)
```

> ∇f  = pushforward(1) # for appropriate `1`-like seed.

Author: ```suggestion
∇f  = pullback(1)  # for appropriate `1`-like seed.
```

s̄, ā, b̄, c̄ = ∇f

> ```

Reviewer 12: I believe this should be:
```julia
y, pullback = rrule(f, a, b, c)
∇f  = pullback(1) # for appropriate `1`-like seed.
s̄, ā, b̄, c̄ = ∇f
```

Author: Yes

Then we have that
`∇f` is the _gradient_ of
`f` at `(a, b, c)`.
And we thus have the partial derivative:
s̄, ā, b̄, c̄.
(Including the and the self-partial derivative,
s̄).
Written mathematically as ``\dfrac{∂f}{∂a}``, ``\dfrac{∂f}{∂b}``, ``\dfrac{∂f}{∂c}``.

### Differentials

The values that come back from pullbacks,
or pushforwards
are not always the same type as the input/outputs of the original function.
They are differentials,

> differency-equivalents.

Reviewer 9: Is this a standard term?

Author: nope.
I'm also not entirely convinced the way we use differentials is inline with standard terms.

this bit should be worked on

A differential might be such a regular type,

> like a Number, or a Matrix,

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
like a `Number`, or a `Matrix`,
```

or it might be one of the `AbstractDifferential` subtypes.

Differentials support a number of operations.
Most importantly:
`+` and `*` which lets them act as mathematically objects.
And `extern` which converts them into a conventional type.

The most important AbstractDifferentials when getting started are the ones about avoiding work:

>  - `Thunk`: this is a deferred computation. A thunk is a [word for a zero argument closure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thunk). An computation wrapped in a `@thunk` doesn't get evaluated until `extern` is called on the `Thunk`. More on thunks later.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
 - `Thunk`: this is a deferred computation. A thunk is a [word for a zero argument closure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thunk). A computation wrapped in a `@thunk` doesn't get evaluated until `extern` is called on the `Thunk`. More on thunks later.
```

>  - `One`, `Zero`: There are special representions of `1` and `0`. They do great things around avoiding expanding `Thunks` in multiplication and (for `Zero`) addition.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
 - `One`, `Zero`: There are special representations of `1` and `0`. They do great things around avoiding expanding `Thunks` in multiplication and (for `Zero`) addition.
```

"They do great things around" sounds a bit odd?

#### Others: don't worry about them right now
 - Wirtinger: it is complex. The docs need to be better. [Read the links in this issue](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRulesCore.jl/issues/40).
 - Casted: it implements broadcasting mechanics. See [#10](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRulesCore.jl/issues/10)
 - InplacableThunk: it is like a Thunk but it can do `store!` and `accumulate!` inplace.

 -------------------------------
## Example of using ChainRules directly.

While ChainRules is largely intended as a backend for Autodiff systems it can be used directly.

> (Infact this can be very useful if you can constraint the code you need to differnetiate to only use thing that have rules defined for.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
(In fact, this can be very useful if you can constraint the code you need to differentiate to only use things that have rules defined for.
```

This was once how all neural network code worked.)

> Using ChainRules directly also helped get a feel for it.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Using ChainRules directly also helps get a feel for it.
```

```julia
using ChainRules

function foo(x)
    a = sin(x)
    b = 2a
    c = asin(b)
    return c
end;

###
# Find dfoo/dx via rrules

# First the forward pass, accumulating rules
x=3;
a, a_pb = rrule(sin, x);
b, b_pb = rrule(*, 2, a);
c, c_pb = rrule(asin, b)

# Then the backward pass calculating gradients
c̄ = 1;
_, b̄ = c_pb(extern(c̄));
_, _, ā = b_pb(extern(b̄));
_, x̄ = a_pb(extern(ā));
extern(x̄)
# -2.0638950738662625

###
# Find dfoo/dx via frules

# Unlike rrule can interleave evaluation and derivative evaluation
x=3;
ẋ=1;
nofields = NamedTuple();

a, a_pf = frule(sin, x);
ȧ = a_pf(nofields, extern(ẋ));

b, b_pf = frule(*, 2, a);
ḃ = b_pf(nofields, 0, extern(ȧ));

c, c_pf = frule(asin, b);
ċ = c_pf(nofields, extern(ḃ));
extern(ċ)
# -2.0638950738662625

###
# Find dfoo/dx via finite-difference
using FiniteDifferences
central_fdm(5,1)(foo, x)
# -2.0638950738670734

###
# Via ForwardDiff.jl
using ForwardDiff
ForwardDiff.derivative(foo, x)
# -2.0638950738662625

###
# Via Zygote
using Zygote
Zygote.gradient(foo, x)
# (-2.0638950738662625,)
```

 -------------------------------

## On writing good rrule / frules

### Return Zero or One

> rather tan `0` or `1`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
rather than `0` or `1`
```

or even rather than `zeros(n)`, `ones(m,n)`

### Use thunks appropriately:

> If work is only required for 1 of the returned differentials it should be wrapped in a `@thunk` (potentially using a begin-end block)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
If work is only required for one of the returned differentials it should be wrapped in a `@thunk` (potentially using a begin-end block)
```

> If work is only required for one of the returned differentials it should be wrapped in a `@thunk` (potentially using a begin-end block)

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
If work is only required for one of the returned differentials it should be wrapped in a `@thunk` (potentially using a `begin`-`end` block).
```

> If there are multiple return values, almost always their should be computation wrapped in a `@thunk`s

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
If there are multiple return values, their computation should almost always be wrapped in a `@thunk`.
```

> Don’t wrap variables in thunks, wrap the computations that fill those variables in thunks: Eg:

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Don’t wrap variables in thunks, wrap the computations that fill those variables in thunks, e.g. write:
```

Write:
```julia
∂A = @thunk(foo(x))
return ∂A
```
Not:
```julia
∂A = foo(x)
return @thunk(∂A)
```
In the bad example `foo(x)` gets computed eagerly, and all that the thunk is doing is wrapping the already calculated result in a function that returns it.

### Be careful with using Adjoint when you mean Transpose

> Rember for complex numbers `a'` (i.e. `adjoint(a)`) takes the complex conjugate. Instead you probably want `transpose(a)`.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Remember for complex numbers `a'` (i.e. `adjoint(a)`) takes the complex conjugate. Instead, you probably want `transpose(a)`.
```

While there are arguments that for reverse-mode

> taking the adjoint is correct, it is not currently the behavour of ChainRules to do so.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
taking the adjoint is correct, it is not currently the behavior of ChainRules to do so.
```

Feel free to open an issue and fight about it.
All differentials support `conj` efficiently, which makes it easy to change in post.

### Style

Used named local functions for the pushforward/pullback:
Rather than:
```julia
function frule(::typeof(foo), x)
        return (foo(x), (_, ẋ)->bar(ẋ))
end
```

> Whichrite:

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
write:
```

?

Author: yep

```julia
function frule(::typeof(foo), x)
        Y = foo(x)
        function foo_pushforward(_, ẋ)
            return bar(ẋ)
        end
        return Y, foo_pushforward
end
```

While this is more verbose,
it ensures that if an error is thrown during the pullback/pushforward
the gensymed name of the local function will include the name you gave it.
Which makes it a lot simpler to debug from the stacktrace.

### Write tests

> There are faily decent tools for writing tests based on [FiniteDifferences.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/FiniteDifferences.jl)

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
There are fairly decent tools for writing tests based on [FiniteDifferences.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/FiniteDifferences.jl)
```

> There are faily decent tools for writing tests based on [FiniteDifferences.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/FiniteDifferences.jl)

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
There are fairly decent tools for writing tests based on [FiniteDifferences.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/FiniteDifferences.jl).
```

They are in [`tests/test_utils.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl/blob/master/test/test_util.jl)
Take a look at existing test and you should see how to do stuff.

!!! important

>     Don't write equations in tests.

Reviewer 9: What does this mean? Perhaps

```suggestion
    Don't use analytical derivations for derivatives in the tests?
```

Author: yes

    Use finite differencing.

>     If you are writing equations in the tests, then you use those same equations as use are using to write your code. Then that is not Ok. We've had several bugs from people misreading/misunderstanding equations, and then using them for both tests and code. And then we have good coverage that is worthless.

Reviewer 9: ```
    If you are writing equations in the tests, then you use those same equations as use are using to write your code. Then that is not Ok. 
```

Not sure what this is trying to say really.

Author: The problem was 
prior to https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl/issues/87
we actually had tests for 
`acshc`, `asec`, `acsc`, `asecd`, and  `acscd` 
but they were wrong in the same way that the definitions were wrong.

Reviewer 13: "Since the tests are often written by the same person who implemented the rule it's likely that a mistake in the analytical expression used in the implementation will also be present in the test, thus rendering the test useless." or something?

### CAS systems are your friends.
E.g. it is very easy to check gradients or deriviatives with [WolframAlpha](https://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=gradient+atan2%28x%2Cy%29).

------------------------------------------

### FAQ:

### What is up with the different symbols?

 - `Δx` is the input to a propagator, (i.e a _seed_ for a _pullback_; or a _perturbation_ for a _pushforward_)
 - `∂x` is the output of a propagator

>  - `dx` could be anything, including a pullback. It really should show up outside of tests.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
 - `dx` could be anything, including a pullback. It really should not show up outside of tests.
```

>  - `ẋ` is a derivative moving forward.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
 - `ẋ` is the intermediary partial derivative used for forward-mode.
```

>  - `x̄` is a dderivative moving backward.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
 - `x̄` is the intermediary sensitivity used for reverse-mode.
```

>  - `Ω` is often used as the return value of the function having the rule found for. Especially, (but not eexlusively.) for scalar functions.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
 - `Ω` is often used as the return value of the function having the rule found for. Especially, (but not exlusively.) for scalar functions.
```

>  - `Ω` is often used as the return value of the function having the rule found for. Especially, (but not eexlusively.) for scalar functions.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
 - `Ω` is often used as the return value of the function having the rule found for. Especially, (but not exclusively.) for scalar functions.
```

```julia
using ChainRules

function foo(x)
    a = sin(x)
    b = 2a
    c = asin(b)
    return c
end;

###
# Find dfoo/dx via rrules

# First the forward pass, accumulating rules
x=3;
a, a_pb = rrule(sin, x);
b, b_pb = rrule(*, 2, a);
c, c_pb = rrule(asin, b)

# Then the backward pass calculating gradients
c̄ = 1;
_, b̄ = c_pb(extern(c̄));
_, _, ā = b_pb(extern(b̄));
_, x̄ = a_pb(extern(ā));
extern(x̄)
# -2.0638950738662625

###
# Find dfoo/dx via frules

# Unlike rrule can interleave evaluation and derivative evaluation
x=3;
ẋ=1;
nofields = NamedTuple();

a, a_pf = frule(sin, x);
ȧ = a_pf(nofields, extern(ẋ));

b, b_pf = frule(*, 2, a);
ḃ = b_pf(nofields, 0, extern(ȧ));

c, c_pf = frule(asin, b);
ċ = c_pf(nofields, extern(ḃ));
extern(ċ)
# -2.0638950738662625

###
# Find dfoo/dx via finite-difference
using FiniteDifferences
central_fdm(5,1)(foo, x)
# -2.0638950738670734

###
# Via ForwardDiff.jl
using ForwardDiff
ForwardDiff.derivative(foo, x)
# -2.0638950738662625

###
# Via Zygote
using Zygote
Zygote.gradient(foo, x)
# (-2.0638950738662625,)
```

 -------------------------------

## On writing good rrule / frules

### Return Zero or One
rather tan `0` or `1`

> or even rather than `zeros(n)`, `ones(m,n)`

Reviewer 7: `One()` can't replace `ones(m, n)`, since it behaves like the unit matrix `I`, which is the neutral element for matrix multiplication.

Author: Good point

Author: ```suggestion
or even rather than `zeros(n)`, or the identity matrix.
```

### Use thunks appropriately:

If work is only required for 1 of the returned differentials it should be wrapped in a `@thunk` (potentially using a begin-end block)

If there are multiple return values, almost always their should be computation wrapped in a `@thunk`s

Don’t wrap variables in thunks, wrap the computations that fill those variables in thunks: Eg:
Write:
```julia
∂A = @thunk(foo(x))
return ∂A
```
Not:
```julia
∂A = foo(x)
return @thunk(∂A)
```
In the bad example `foo(x)` gets computed eagerly, and all that the thunk is doing is wrapping the already calculated result in a function that returns it.

> ### Becareful of using Adjoing when you mean Transpose

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
### Be careful with using Adjoint when you mean Transpose
```
Otherwise, yes!

Rember for complex numbers `a'` (i.e. `adjoint(a)`) takes the complex conjugate. Instead you probably want `transpose(a)`.

> While there are arguments that for reverse-mode

Reviewer 7: I'm not a big fan of the wording here, since it implies that one approach would be more correct than the other, when it's actually just a matter of which definition you use. I've just made a PR to explain this a bit better in the Zygote docs in FluxML/Zygote.jl#328, feel free to reference this here.

taking the adjoint is correct, it is not currently the behavour of ChainRules to do so.
Feel free to open an issue and fight about it.

> All differentials support `conj` efficiently, which makes it easy to change in post.

Reviewer 7: `Wirtinger` does not.

Author: But there is a TODO.

Reviewer 7: Yes, but I doubt whether this would be a good idea. This would mostly hide errors, since if you're conjugating a `Wirtinger`, you are probably doing something wrong.

Author: I'm not sure if this actually belongs in getting start front pages kinda docs anyway.
I should learn more about this fight myself
